Who in here considers themselves a history buff? Occasional hobby
historians in the room? (Don’t worry, I won’t quiz you on anything.)
Cold War buffs, perhaps? I’m going to start by introducing you to an
interesting event in Cold War history, that very very few people have
even heard of. And it even happened just 300km from here!


The day is October 10, 1975 — 44 years ago almost to the day. And on
this autumn Friday, a young doctor, fresh out of medical school, is on
shift in the emergencies and accidents ward in the hospital of a
Swedish coastal town of about 35,000 people. It’s been a very calm
morning, and it’s now lunchtime and most of the senior personnel –
doctors and nurses — are down in the hospital cafeteria for
lunch. Everything looks and feels very routine.


And then suddenly, the phone rings. The hospital is being advised by
emergency responders that a plane crash has occurred in the vicinity,
and that the hospital will imminently receive the first casualties,
by helicopter.


As soon as the young doctor hangs up, he grabs a nurse and they race
over to the shelf with the binders containing the emergency
procedures, because they now have to immediately prepare the ER for a
mass-casualty contingency, so: set up triage procedures, remove
all non-essential vehicles from the parking lot, activate personnel
that’s on call, etc, etc. But their frantic preparation is cut short
when they hear the chopper land on the hospital’s pad, and seconds
later the first patient is wheeled through the ER doors on a
stretcher.


And the doctor immediately starts evaluating the patient. He is
conscious and breathing, but he’s not in great shape: he is shaking
violently, he is incoherent, and when the doctor addresses him he
can’t verbally respond — all he utters is a sound like /ʒʒʒʒʒʒʒ/. The
doctor immediately recognizes this as symptoms consistent with
cerebral trauma; the patient evidently has a head injury and could
collapse any moment.


As he’s examined the patient, the doctor has removed the patient’s
life jacket (it was a plane crash into water), dropping it on the
floor, and what he sees now is a military flight suit that the patient
is wearing; he is evidently dealing with an fighter or bomber
pilot. And suddenly the penny drops for the doctor that the /ʒʒʒ/
sound that the pilot was making could have been an attempt to speak
Russian. The doctor speaks a little Russian from classes he took at
university, so to reassure the patient that he’ll be all right he
says: “Я врач. Вы в шведской больнице.” (Ya vrach, vy v shvedskoy
bolnitse) — “I am a doctor, you are in a Swedish hospital.”


And at this, the pilot’s eyes widen in horror. He’s still not
responding, but to the doctor the picture is clear: this is a Soviet
pilot who is understandably terrified that he’s been shot down over
hostile territory. And he comes to a dismal conclusion: if we’re
shooting down Soviet jets, then we’re probably at war with the Soviet
Union. And *that,* in turn, means that we’re probably in the opening
minutes of World War III (remember, this is 1975).


But as he momentarily looks down, he realizes that he has an urgent
problem on his hands with this patient: he is standing in a red puddle
that has formed on the floor. So this patient evidently doesn’t just
suffer from cerebral trauma, but he also has an open wound, possibly
an arterial bleeding _that they haven’t found yet._ So they need to
get his flight suit off of him as soon as possible.

Unfortunately, the doctor isn’t very accustomed to patients wearing
military flight suits, so he’s running into a snag: he simply can’t
find the right zippers or buckles to get the suit off of the
pilot. Whatever he tries, all he manages to open is one of the many
pockets the suit has. So, he grabs a pair of scissors to cut the suit
open.


Now it’s something like 90 seconds after the call, and the senior
doctors and nurses finally pour in from where they had spent their
lunch break. And just as he’s about to cut into the flight suit, a
nurse grabs stops him and says “don’t do that, that’s a G-suit, those
are 10,000 kronor apiece” (in 1975 kronor, that’s about 57,000 today).

And the doctor looks at her, momentarily befuddled. She adds, “and
you may want to step off his rescue jacket; looks like you popped the
sea-dye marker cartridge and you’re making a mess all over the floor.”

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EFlh61jRnf0

After which she expertly strips the patient of his flight suit, and
the evaluation of the patient continues. The patient which, it turns
out, is a Swedish air force pilot who was forced to eject from his
Saab AJ 37 Viggen strike fighter on a routine training flight over the
Baltic sea because of a structural failure — a _wing fracture,_ a
problem which plagued the airframe in the mid-70s — and who was pulled
out of the 8°C water by a search-and-rescue team. Which flew him
promptly to the nearest hospital because he was suffering from a
rather bad case of hypothermia, the symptoms of which include
incoherence, slurred speech, and violent shivers.

